It's time for another Framework Aside,
where we step aside for
a moment to talk about using the things
we've learned within libraries,
frameworks, and more complex code.
Things that you'll often see if
you crack open the source code of
famous libraries and frameworks.
In this case, after we've talked
about objects, the dot operator, and
object literals, we're going to
talk about faking namespaces.
Well, wait a minute.
Big word alert.
A namespace.
In modern coding, a namespace is
a container for variables and functions.
And that's really all it is.
It's just a holder, a container.
And typically it's used to keep variables
and functions with the same name separate.
But here's the problem,
JavaScript doesn't have namespaces.
Now, if you're not familiar
with this concept,
we'll show you why it's useful,
and if you are familiar with it,
in other programming languages,
you'll see that in JavaScript,
because of the nature of objects,
we don't need namespaces as a feature.
We can fake it.
So, here we have another app.js file,
and I have two greet variables.
One says hello, and
the other one is in Spanish and says hola.
So, when I console.log(greet),
what do you think I'm going to see?
Will I see hello or hola?
Well, we know that in the creation
phase this will be set to undefined.
And then synchronously these lines
of code will be run in order.
So, the greet should be hola.
And that's what it is.
But let's imagine that these two variables
were created in two
different JavaScript files.
Maybe one for English greetings, and
some other library or framework for
Spanish greetings that I found.
This would be a problem because we know
that both are setting their value, in this
case on the global object, and overwriting
each other, as we've seen before.
Namespaces would help
us with this because,
in the case of namespaces we would have
a container for the English greeting and
a container for the Spanish greeting,
and it's related methods and properties.
And that we don't have
name spaces in JavaScript,
we can do just that with objects.
So we can prevent this collision for
example, by creating an object that
will be the container for our properties
and methods and the things we want to use.
So I'll create an English object,
just using object literal syntax, and
a Spanish object creating
object literal syntax.
And I'm just going to use
this object as a container.
It won't really have any other
functionality, and that's okay.
So, I can then say,
well I'll do english.greet = Hello.
And spanish.greet = Hola.
And these two variables,
although are both called greet,
they don't collide with each other,
they don't override each other.
So at this point,
I can simply look at, for
example the english property,
this object, and
it has greet on it, and it's hello.
And so this variable has just become,
basically a container,
to make sure I don't collide with other
things, with other JavaScript files,
with other variables in
the global namespace, etc.
So this you'll see a lot inside of
frameworks and libraries and you can use
in your own code as a method, to make sure
that when you're writing a function and
someone else is writing a function, that
we don't have any namespace collisions.
Meaning two things that
are named the same.
Now, what's nice is you could
make this as deep as you want.
You could keep having levels of
different containing objects.
For example, maybe I'd wanna say that
english actually has a greetings
name space inside of it, and inside
of there I'd hold various greetings.
Now the thing is, this is where object
literal syntax is a bit more powerful.
I can't just go
english.greetings.greet = hello.
Why?
Well, I'll get uncaught type error.
Cannot set property greet of undefined.
Well why did that happen?
Well, remember this is an operator
that's left-associative,
meaning first the leftmost one gets
called and then further on, so
on an so forth to the right,
assuming they all are the same function or
have the same priority.
Now, when this dot operator
is called it looks for
a greetings variable on english, and
since it's empty, it doesn't find it.
So this is undefined, and
then it passes undefined, to the dot
operator and it says, well I can't.
Undefined isn't even an object.
So I'm not going to find greet on it.
And that's why it says cannot
set property greet of undefined.
I can't find it and I can't create it
because this, english.greetings actually
is returning undefined and I'm trying
to do this, and that just doesn't work.
So I can't create on the fly.
I would have to say
english.greetings = and
then create an object so
that now there's an object in memory, and
then I could attach
a greet inside of there.
Or, I could simply initialize
this using object literal syntax,
which lets me say greetings and
then inside there, have another object.
And maybe instead of greet,
I'll just say basic and
I'll have various greetings in here.
And say hello.
And let me maneuver this a bit so
it's a bit easier to read.
So since object literal syntax is
creating this on the fly, I could
do this like this, and then greetings
is created, and then basic is created.
And so I don't get any undefined errors
because it's all created at once.
As opposed to the dot operator,
which was doing it one at a time,
and failed because I hadn't
created this greetings first.
Make sense?
So I can do it either way,
but the idea here
is that I have contained my properties.
I've contained my variables,
maybe my functions and methods, and
other objects, inside a container object,
and that's all it's really doing.
It's just keeping us separate
from any other code,
any other objects sitting in the global
namespace from the global object that
someone else might have written or even
that we've written and forgotten about.
So, that's faking
namespaces in JavaScript.
And again, you'll see this sort of
thing if you crack open the source code
of frameworks and
libraries that people use everyday.